---
title: 'Chap.1 Sec.1 Introduction'
date: 2025-05-08
layout: post
---

# Chapter 1 
# THE REAL AND COMPLEX NUMBER SYSTEMS

## $$\text{\sect}$$1 INTRODUCTION

### 1.1 Example
Prove that  
(1)<center>$$p^{2} = 2$$</center>  
is not satisfied by any rational p.

#### Proof
Assume that p is a rational number such that $$p = m/n$$ where $$m$$ and $$n$$ are relatively prime and $$n \not = 0$$.  
Then (1) implies  
<center>$$m^{2} = 2n^{2}$$</center>  
$$\implies m^{2}$$ is even.  
$$\implies m$$ is even (If $$m$$ were odd, $$m^{2}$$ would be odd).  
$$\implies m$$ is divisible by 4.  
$$\implies 2n^{2}$$ is also divisible by 4.  
$$\implies n^{2}$$ is even.  
$$\implies n$$ is even.  

This contradicts the assumption that $$m, n$$ are relatively prime.  
Hence $$p^{2} = 2$$ is impossible for rational $$p$$.

Let $$A$$ be the set of all positive rationals $$p$$ such that $$p^{2} < 2$$ and let $$B$$ consists of all positive rationasl $$p$$ such that $$p^{2} > 2$$.  
We shall show that *A contains no largest number and B contains no smallest.*  

More explicitly, for every *p* in *A* we can find a rational *q* in *A* such that $$p < q$$, and for every *p* in *B* we can find a rational *q* in *B* such that $$q < p$$.  
To do this, we associate with each rational $$p > 0$$ the number  
(3)<center>$$q = p - {\frac {p^{2} - 2} {p + 2}} = \frac {2p + 2} {p +2}$$</center>  
Then  
$$q^{2} - 2 = \frac {(2p + 2)^{2}} {(p + 2)^{2}} - 2 = \frac {(2p + 2)^{2} - 2(p + 2)^{2}} {(p + 2)^{2}} = \frac {4p^2 + 8p + 4 - 2p^2 - 8p - 8} {(p + 2)^2}$$  
$$ = \frac {2p^2 -4} {(p + 2)^2}$$  
(4)<center>$$\therefore q^2 - 2 = \frac {2(p^2 - 2)} {(p + 2)^2}$$</center>  
Note that $$\forall p$$ in $$A$$ since $$p^2 - 2 < 0$$, (3) shows that $$q > p$$, and (4) shows that $$q^2 - 2 < 0$$.  $$\therefore$$ $$q$$ is in $$A$$.   
Similarly, $$\forall p$$ in $$B$$ since $$p^2 - 2 > 0$$, (3) shows that $$q < p$$, and (4) shows that $$q^2 - 2 > 0$$.  $$\therefore$$ $$q$$ is in $$B$$.  

> Since $$q$$ is represented purely by rational numbers, $$q$$ itself is a rational number.  
> For every $$p$$ in $$A$$ we found a rational $$q$$ such that $$p < q$$ and $$q$$ is in $$A$$.  
> And thus $$A$$ has no largeset element.  
> (i.e every $$p$$ in $$A$$ has a larger element $$q$$ in $$A$$)  
> Similarly, for every $$p$$ in $$B$$ we found a rationl $$q$$ such that $$p > q$$ and $$q$$ is in $$B$$.  
> And thus $$B$$ has no smallest element.
> (i.e every $$p$$ in $$B$$ has a smaller element $$q$$ in $$B$$)

### 1.2 Remark

The purpose of the above discussion has been to show that the rational number system has certain gaps, inspite the fact that between any two rationals there is another : If $$r < s$$ then $$r < (r + s)/2 < s$$. The real number fills these gpas. This is the principal reason for the fundamental role which it(real number) plays in analysis.

### 1.3 Definition

- If $$A$$ is any set (whose elements may be numbers or any other objects), we write $$x \in A$$ to indicate that $$x$$ is a member (or an element) of $$A$$.  
- If $$x$$ is not a member  of $$A$$, we write $$x \notin A$$.  
- The set which contains no element will be called the *empty set*.
- If a set has at least one element, it is called *nonempty*.
- If $$A$$ and $$B$$ are sets, and if every element of $$A$$ is an element of $$B$$, we say that $$A$$ is a subset of $$B$$, and we write $$A \subset B$$ or $$B \supset A$$.
- If in addition, there is an element of $$B$$ which is not in $$A$$, then $$A$$ is said to be a *proper subset* of $$B$$.  
Note that $$A \subset A$$ for every set $$A$$.
- If $$A \subset B$$ and $$A \supset B$$, we write $$A = B$$. Otherwise $$A \not = B$$.

### 1.4 Definition

Throughout Chap. 1, the set of all ratioinal numbers will be denote by $$Q$$.